In 1543 the Matsudaira House was jockeying for power in the very important province of Mikawa. With some of the best area for farming rice, multiple daimyo sought control of Mikawa. In 1543 Matsudaira Hirotada, the daimyo of a large portion of Mikawa welcomed a new son into the family, Matsudaira Takechiyo. He would not live to see his new son grow up as he died when Takechiyo was just six years old. Takechiyo’s turbulent childhood included being kidnapped and ransomed by rival daimyo and the concomitant diminution of the Matsudaira house’s fortunes. 

As a young man, Takechiyo exhibited leadership qualities to the point of inspiring the sagging spirits of samurai attached to the Matsudaira clan.  Takechiyo’s military victories across Mikawa were so impressive that in 1566 the emperor gave him the title of Mikawa no Kami or lord of Mikawa. The following year Takechiyo changed his surname and given name to Tokugawa Ieyasu.

Serving as an ally to Nobunaga and then Hideyoshi, Ieyasu became the dominant daimyo in Japan’s Kanto area in eastern Honshu.  He was given the village town of Edo which served as the Tokugawa house headquarters.  But following the 1598 death of Hideyoshi, he moved to Osaka and claimed that he was taking the lead in protecting Hideyoshi’s widow and the young heir, Hideyori. He also began sending letters to the various daimyo seeking their allegiance, which created deep resentment with Hideyoshi’s other generals. Those that were loyal to the Toyotomi family began to fear that Ieyasu was positioning himself to become shogun and rumblings of war again troubled the realm.

This rivalry was not only between the Toyotomi and Tokugawa factions but was also western versus eastern armies. The military showdown took place at Sekigahara on October 21, 1600 in one of the epic battles of Japan’s long history.  Throughout that fateful battle, the future of Japan was at stake as the conflict’s outcome was in doubt until the very end of the day. Tokugawa Ieyasu emerged victorious and used this military success to implement his rule in Japan.

Building off of Hideyoshi’s cadastral survey and the division of land based on rice production, Ieyasu stripped 87 daimyo of their domains.  Japan was divided up into hans (domains), each one had to produce at least 10,000 koku annually. In a very astute move, Ieyasu distributed governance of Japan’s land to three different types of daimyo (military governors).  About one third of Japan’s riches (rice) were put in the hands of the daimyo related to the Tokugawa house. The second group of daimyo were known as the fudai daimyo and those were the generals who allied with Ieyasu at the Battle of Sekigahara. Finally, land that annually yielded more than ten million koku was given to thetozama daimyo—or those that had not allied with the Tokugawa house.  This was one of many reasons that there was not a further rebellion against the Tokugawa clan.

In 1603 Tokugawa Ieyasu was given the title of seii tai-shogun by the emperor, meaning he was declared the realm’s top general. The policies that he, his son, and grandson put in place laid the foundation for one of the most remarkable periods in Japanese history. Known as Tokugawa Japan, also as Edo Japan, the period from 1600 to 1868 was one of great peace and moved Japan toward modernity. Historians often label the political paradigm the Tokugawa shoguns implemented as the Baku-Han system. Some of the more prominent features of this structure are noted below.

The Tokugawa house continued the practice of keeping the military headquarters (bakufu) separate from the imperial capital (Kyoto). The Tokguawa bakufu in Edo transformed the area from a fishing village to what some claim was the world’s largest city by 1700, with a population of over one million. Yet many have noted that while Tokugawa Japan experienced great peace and a sophisticated political system, it was not really a unified state. The realm was divided up into various domains that numbered almost 300 by the end of the Edo era.  Each domain, also known as a han, was controlled from a castle town where the military governor and his samurai retainers resided. Hans were semi-autonomous states enjoying their own economic and judicial systems. As noted earlier, most hans were ruled by daimyo not related to the Tokugawa family and these hans were not required to pay any taxes to the bakufu.

While many daimyo enjoyed semi-autonomous status, they were accountable for keeping their domain’s inhabitants safe and free from starvation. The bakufu had the authority to remove or transfer incompetent daimyo, and the military governors needed the shogun’s permission to marry. Daimyo were not allowed to expand their castle structure without permission from the daimyo. For long periods of Tokugawa Japan, the daimyo were also forced to keep their wife and first son in Edo in an almost hostage-type of arrangement. Furthermore, the daimyo were required to visit Edo regularly in a pattern that became known as sankin kotai, or alternate attendance. All of these rules helped to keep a balance of power and accountability throughout Tokugawa Japan.

Tokugawa Ieyasu differed from the first two unifiers in that he had many children. Just between 1557 and 1583 he sired ten children with five different women. He became a father for the last time in 1607 at the age of 64. With so many children, he was able to distribute authority and rule through his sons. In 1605, just two years after accepting the title of shogun, he resigned his position and it was passed on to his 26-year-old son, Hidetada. This astute move guaranteed that the Tokugawa rule would extend after Ieyasu passed from the scene. Nonetheless, Ieyasu continued to be the main authority of the bakufu until his death in 1616.

Between his 1605 resignation and his death in 1616, Ieyasu kept busy. He became one of the world’s richest men by monopolizing the mining industry in Japan. This was a period in China when the Ming dynasty was in its death throes and was desperately seeking Japanese imported silver to keep the system afloat. During the first decade of the seventeenth century it is estimated that up to one-third of the world’s silver came out of Japan, and much of it was sold to China, making Ieyasu extremely wealthy. Despite his enormous riches, Ieyasu preferred the simple life. His passions included the sport of hawking and he would take a simple lunch out with him on the many days that he spent absorbed in the sport. Though he was involved in over a dozen major battles, he turned in his older age toward a more completive life following the doctrines of both neo-Confucianism and the Tendai sect of Buddhism.

However, Ieyasu’s parting gift to his offspring and future Tokugawa shoguns was one of the more cruel acts he perpetrated. Hideyoshi’s son, Hideyori and his mother continued to dwell in safety at the Osaka Castle. There were many anti-Tokugawa officials and military leaders that continued to support the Toyotomi family with the hopes that Hideyori would one day supplant the Tokugawa house and establish a Toytomoi shogunate. Ieyasu was wary of this potential development and so in 1614 he gathered tens of thousands of samurai and marched to Osaka with the intention of eliminating the Toyotomi threat. In a somewhat surprising development, Ieyasu’s army lost the initial battle and he retreated back to eastern Honshu. Believing that Hideyori’s position was so secure in the Osaka Castle, Ieyasu bargained with the Toyotomi house, promising to cede portions of Japan to it in exchange for Hideyori removing the defenses around the Osaka Castle. Hideyori agreed to this plan, and the moats around the castle are filled in.  This spelled disaster for the Toyotomi family as Ieyasu almost immediately returned with his army to Osaka and on June 5, 1615 they broke through the castle. Despite pleas for mercy, Ieyasu made sure that Hideyori and his mother died in the battle. Part of this destruction of the Toyotomi family included a public decapitation of Hideyori’s eight-year-old son.

With the elimination of the Hideyori threat, Ieyasu believed that he had provided a bright future for the Tokugawa shoguns who would follow after him. On June 1, 1616, almost one year to the day after the fall of the Osaka Castle, Ieyasu died of congestive heart failure. 