Oda Nobunaga’s father was a deputy for a daimyo and was given responsibility for portions of the Owari domain. This was a province  made up of eight districts and was one of the more productive portions of Japan for the dietary staple of rice. In 1551, Oda Nobunaga inherited the portion of land that his father protected and he began to extend his hegemony to other districts within Owari. As noted above, this was the common practice of the day. In a world of gekokuju jidai, all that was needed to extend one’s authority was opportunity, vision, and bravery. Nobunaga had all of these items in his toolkit. Like other opportunists that extended their authority, Nobunaga needed a big break to attract masterless samurai and farming villages. That small marvel came in 1560 when a leading daimyo, Imagawa Yoshimoto from the neighboring Suruga Province led an army of 40,000 to squash the upstart Oda Nobunaga. With just 2,000 samurai, Nobunaga defeated Imagawa’s invading force and in the battle Imagawa lost his life.

Nobunaga’s quickly followed up this victory by forging an alliance in 1562 with Tokugawa Ieyasu, the daimyo of Mikawa Province. Having secured his eastern flank, Nobunaga turned his attention to consolidating his hold on central Honshu. An early adopter of gun weaponry, Nobunaga established an armory at Sakai and successfully integrated these weapons in his battle plans.

Seeking greater legitimacy, Nobunaga marched into the imperial capital in 1568. Working together with the imperial and bakufu, Nobunaga maneuvered for Ashikaga Yoshiaki to be installed as the bakufu’s next shogun. Nobunaga planned to rule behind the scenes and simply use Yoshiaki as a political puppet. The plan went awry when Yoshiaki failed to defer to Nobunaga; subsequently, Nobunaga brought the Ashikaga shogunate to an end in 1573. Eschewing the need for bakufu authority, Nobunaga defeated six of the strongest military houses in western Honshu.

What struck the Europeans in Japan as most strange regarding Nobunaga’s military conquests was the lack of mercy shown to his enemies, especially the Buddhist monks. In a particular battle at Mount Hiei, over ten thousand Buddhist monks from the Tendai sect begged Nobunaga to accept gold from the institution rather than taking their lives. Nobunaga refused the overture and slaughtered the monks.
Nobunaga had ten major daimyo who reported to him and he often sought their advice. He was open to criticism from those close to him, and expected candor from his generals rather than patronizing acquiescence.

Between 1576 and 1579 Nobunaga lived in relative peace in a castle close to the imperial capital. He was not given the title of shogun, but was not bothered by this given his belief that brute power legitimizes authority. But in his rise to power he had to make difficult decisions that garnered him many enemies—even from within his own ranks.

One of his top generals, Akechi Mitsuhide held a grudge against Nobunaga due to Nobunaga’s role in the death of Akechi’s mother. In 1582 while Nobunaga was at a Kyoto Buddhist temple for a tea ceremony, he was caught by surprise when Akechi surrounded the temple to exact revenge against his master.  He set the temple on fire and Nobunaga along with his son died. Thus, the meteoric rise of the lowly jito from Owari came to a sudden ignoble end.

Nobunaga had accomplished a great deal. He began the process of unification, removed the Ashikiga shogunate, and established a modicum of order across Honshu. Yet, his legacy in Japanese history is mixed. Because he eschewed the Confucian values of deference based on filial relationships, and a ruler-subject bond, he is viewed as someone who did not follow the properdao or way prescribed to humans from heaven itself. 
