Since Minamoto Yoritomo was given the title seii tai-shogun (Japan’s leading military figure) in 1192, Japan functioned as a semi-bicameral political state. The emperor, which legitimized the shogun’s rule by appointing each successive military ruler, lived in Kyoto with other aristocratic families. The shogun and his close advisers chose an area to establish their geographical headquarters, which became known as the bakufu or the tent government. The Minamoto shogunate chose the beautiful setting of Kamakura as its home.  The emperor reigned but did not rule; it was the shogun and his deputies that governed Japan.

By 1333 the Minamoto bakufu had grown weak and the expenses related to defending Japan against Mongol invasions (1274, 1281) emptied the bakufu’s coffers.  Cousins of the Minamoto shogun (all subsequent shoguns had to be related to Yoritomo) the Ashikaga clan established the second shogunate rule, the Ashikaga bakufu (1336-1573) and placed its headquarters in Kyoto’s neighboring town of Muromachi. From the outset, the Ashikaga had multiple challenges of trying to keep unity throughout Japan.  Upstart emperors who wanted greater say in the running of their realm had to be quieted while bakufu-appointed military governors faced the dilemma of deputies carving out independent fiefs throughout Japan.

As each decade passed, imperial and shogunate power and authority waned. Jizamurai—-samurai who lived within villages—farmed during planting and harvesting season and fought during the other parts of the year.  The bakufu tried to keep the centuries-long political system in place by appointing military governors, also known as shugo or daimyo to keep peace throughout Japan and provide taxes for the emperor and bakufu. These daimyo delegated authority to their retainer samurai and made some of them deputies (jito). But chaos prevailed through the first half of the sixteenth century.  Jito began to break free from their overlords and farmers were brought into the fray as huge armies emerged to help the upstart jito and daimyo fight for control of the land.

The Japanese worldview which was an amalgamation of Confucian, Buddhist, and Shinto beliefs emphasized a schematized social system where loyalty, deference to authority, and a rigid class system kept Japan in relative peace and prosperity for close to a millennium. But everything seemed to have changed during the Ashikaga bakufu. Japan’s sixteenth century moniker was gekokujo jidai “mastery of the high by the low.” It seemed wherever anyone turned, rebellion and deference to authority was replaced by Machiavellian pragmatism.

To add fuel to the fire of chaos, it was in the mid-sixteenth century that Westerners, in the form of Portuguese traders and Jesuit priests, entered Japan. Guns and cannons first brought by the Portuguese were duplicated in mass by Japanese entrepreneurial daimyo and metal workers. These guns and cannons spurred daimyo and jito to establish castles as defense fortresses against Japan’s nascent weaponry. The Portuguese were astounded at the lack of loyalty and the ubiquitous betrayals between jito and daimyo.  It seemed that everyone, including farming villages, chose to follow whoever promised the lowest taxes along with the maximum protection. War and plunder characterized both the countryside and the imperial capital. While the emperor and shogun still held their titles and positions, they were powerless against the tide and momentum of civil wars across the domains. The situation was akin to the British tale of Humpty Dumpty, the English egg fallen off a wall and scattered into hundreds of pieces. There were not enough imperial officials and bakufu samurai to put Japan back together again. And then three men changed everything. 
