Oda Nobunaga died without reunifying all of Japan. There were still independent domains scattered throughout Honshu (particularly the extreme eastern portion of the island) and Kyushu was dominated by two autonomous daimyos.  Furthermore, it was not clear as to who would take control of the lands and peoples that Nobunaga had managed to unite. Out of this chaos and potential dissolution of Nobunaga’s unification campaign emerged a most surprising leader who is considered one of the most important Japanese leaders in history.

Toyotomi Hideyoshi was the son of a low-ranking samurai in the Owari domain. When Hideyoshi was in his mid-teens he walked off the farm and sought attachment to an established or up-and-coming daimyo. He placed his bets on the rising star Oda Nobunaga. It was a good bet.  Starting out at the lowest level in Nobunaga’s retinue, Hideyoshi slowly rose in ranks, gaining the confidence of his master by his victories on the battlefield and unswerving loyalty. He became part of Nobunaga’s inner circle of military leaders, and at the time of Nobunaga’s assassination Hideyoshi was waging a brutal battle against the recalcitrant Mori house in the Bitchū Province, west of Kyoto.  Nobunaga’s death created a power vacuum, and while some of his generals quickly retreated to their home provinces, Hideyoshi marched toward Kyoto with the intention of killing his master’s assassin.  Hideyoshi’s troops caught up with Akechi’s army, and following a bloody battle Hideyoshi emerged victorious, brought Akechi’s corpse back to Kyoto, and took on the mantle of Nobunaga’s successor.

Building on Nobunaga’s military successes, Hideyoshi appreciated the power of diplomatic persuasion much more than his master did. He secured alliances through both diplomatic and military prowess during the first years following Nobunaga’s death. The two main holdouts were the Kyushu domains and the extreme eastern section of Honshu controlled by the Hojo House. With regard to the hinterlands of Kyushu, Hideyoshi adroitly sided with Kyushu’s Ōtomo Sōrin (a Christian Daimyo) against Satsuma, the leading domain on Kyushu. Following Hideyoshi/ Ōtomo‘s 1586 victory over Satsuma, Ōtomo submitted to Hideyoshi’s hegemonic rule over the Kyushu domains.
Finally, in 1590, four years following the battles in Kyushu, the Hōjō daimyo in the eastern portion of  Honshu was the final holdout against the full unification of Japan. Hōjō Ujimasa whose Odawara castle in Sagami Province appeared impregnable refused to acquiesce to Hideyoshi’s overtures for peace. In fact, it took a three-month siege for Hideyoshi’s army to finally capture the fortress. Hōjō Ujimasa might have imagined that he would receive mercy from Hideyoshi because the Satsuma daimyo had actually been given favorable terms following his defeat in Kyushu a few years earlier. But Hideyoshi became a bit more unpredictable with age and he ordered Hōjō to commit seppuku following the fall of Odawara.

As Hideyoshi’s steady hegemonic control of Japan continued, he established brilliant policies that transformed Japan and in many ways began to usher in a system that would stay in place until the end of the nineteenth century.  A primary concern for Hideyoshi was the elimination of large armies that had plagued Japan for decades during the Sengoku era.  He did this in two ways where everyone in Japan could feel somewhat good about these monumental shifts in Japan’s social history. He began his policies of peace by disarming the farmers. In 1588 Hideyoshi ordered that all weapons be taken away from farmers. It was called The Great Sword Hunt, and it effectively reduced Japan’s fighting population to the samurai class, which was around six percent of the population.  No longer could daimyo co-op farmers to serve as infantry soldiers, as farmers were prohibited from owning weapons. Some of the swords collected from the farmers were melted down and the metal used to form a large Buddha statue.

This weapons-control edict did not sit well with the farmers, but certainly the samurai and the Buddhist sangha (community/church) benefited from this. For the Buddhist leaders, they had a new statue in the Asuka-dera monastery in Nara. Samurai enjoyed the exclusive status of sword-carrying privilege throughout the realm. If one was wearing a sword, then everyone knew that individual was from the samurai class. The sword brought with it both status and privilege and now only the samurai could carry such a weapon. But not all was lost for the peasants.

On the heels of this famous sword hunt, Hideyoshi froze the social order. Broadly dividing Japan’s population into four classes: samurai, farmer, artisan and merchant, Hideyoshi decreed that these classes were fixed and prohibited movement from one class to another; as such, samurai were ordered to attach themselves to a particular daimyo and move away from the peasants. This affected tens of thousands of individuals who were known as jizamurai or “samurai of the land.” The jizamurai lived among the farmers and worked side-by-side commoners. With Hideyoshi’s new policy, however, samurai were, for the most part, detached from their farms and agrarian neighbors. This was to the advantage of the common folk because they were no longer intimidated by their military neighbors and were more free than ever to work the land.

Of even greater importance than the already-noted profound social changes, was  Hideyoshi’s order to conduct a national cadastral survey. In short, every inch of Japan’s agricultural land was measured in terms of just not geographical location but annual production. Rural lands were all placed in categories such as wet land, dry land, residence land and kitchen gardens. Rice paddies were labeled superior, medium and inferior based on farming records.  Following this massive undertaking, the government, now under the rule of Hideyoshi, issued documents to families who had worked that land for generations. Furthermore, each village was assessed a certain amount of annual tax (usually paid in rice) based on the cadastral survey.  The harvested rice was measured in terms of koku which was around 300 pounds each or about 5.1 bushels—enough to feed a person for a year.

The implications of this project were massive. Government officials knew how much annual revenue to expect and planned accordingly. Farmers knew how much they were to be taxed and their annual contribution to the village—tax was collected at the village level. This also led many farmers to seek ways to improve their harvests as they would not be penalized for growing more than the cadastral assessment—the tax was at a fixed amount.

Based on this survey, Hideyoshi divided the responsibility of ruling Japan to his generals. In addition to the geographical division of the land, Hideyoshi also noted how much koku each general should receive based on their domains. For example, while his top general, Tokugawa Ieyasu was given the eastern provinces to govern, he also knew that these provinces annually produced 2.4 million koku—which made him the highest “earning” general in the land. This fostered a sense of reciprocity and loyalty between Hideyoshi and his military governors.

During the last decade of his life, Hideyoshi veered away from his reliance on diplomacy and acted somewhat erratically. For example, while at times he appeared to appreciate the work of the Jesuits and Franciscans in Japan, he also ordered the execution of Catholic priests and Japanese Christians. This included the 1596 crucifixion of 26 Christians (nine priests and seventeen Japanese laymen) in Nagasaki.  Just one year earlier, Hideyoshi had his nephew (Toyotomi Hidetsugu) executed along with 31 of his family members. Hidetsugu was in line to take over after his uncle died, but Hideyoshi had a son in his old age and so he wanted to remove all potential rivals. For reasons that remain somewhat unclear, Hideyoshi also ordered that Japan conquer China. Thousands of samurai were sent to Korea as a stepping stone to China, but they found fierce resistance from Korean and Chinese soldiers and became bogged down in a somewhat senseless military campaign.

A bright spot for Hideyoshi in his final years was the birth of a long-hoped-for heir in 1593. Though he had united Japan, Hideyoshi did not have the pedigree to become shogun. His wife Yodo-dono was distantly related to the Minamoto house and so when she gave birth to Toyotomi Hideyori in 1593, there was an heir that had the bloodline to establish a new shogunate rule. In many ways, Hideyoshi set the table for a long and prosperous rule by his successor. Unfortunately, Hideyori was only five years old when Hideyoshi died in 1598 and Japan faced another crisis in leadership.

During his last days, Hideyoshi requested that his top five generals swear an oath of loyalty to his young son, Hideyori.  The five generals agreed to act as protectors for the Toyotomi heir until he was old enough to lead Japan and rule as a court-appointed shogun.  The five generals agreed to serve as regent to the boy as he lived with his mother in the Osaka Castle. Tokugawa Ieyasu, Hideyoshi’s most powerful ally and one of the generals who swore allegiance to Hideyori had different plans about who should take over a new unified Japan—namely, himself. 
